JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour"
tonight: a turn in the
Russia investigation.
Special counsel Robert Mueller
moves beyond the 2016 election,
investigating possible
obstruction of justice
by the president since he
took office in January.
Also ahead: Twelve Turkish
security agents are
charged after a violent
clash with protesters
outside Turkey's embassy in
D.C., testing already shaky
diplomatic relations between
the two countries.
Then: a look at companies,
including one owned by
Jared Kushner's family,
that take advantage
of tax breaks to create jobs in
high unemployment areas, but do
those jobs end up going to those
who need them?
MAN: Several of us tried
to get a job downtown.
But they're not hiring us.
I don't know no one at all
who has no type of job from
downtown at Trump Towers or who
informed anyone
else about the jobs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
is now under scrutiny for
possible obstruction of justice,
and he's fighting back.
This follows news reports that
special counsel Bob Mueller has
broadened his probe originally
focused on Russia
meddling in the election.
On Twitter today, the president
complained - - quote -- "They
made up a phony collusion
with the Russians story, found
zero proof, so now they go
for obstruction of justice.
Nice."
Later, Mr. Trump charged that
Hillary Clinton committed a list
of infractions, and was cleared
anyway.
There's also word that Vice
President Mike Pence has hired
outside legal counsel to deal
with the Russia investigations.
His office tells The Washington
Post that former U.S. attorney
Richard Cullen will handle
inquiries from
congressional committees
and the special counsel.
The president hired his own
private lawyer last month.
We will examine all of this, and
talk to the vice chairman of the
Senate Intelligence Committee,
Senator Mark Warner, right
after the news summary.
The U.S. Senate today
overwhelmingly approved
new sanctions against
both Iran and Russia.
The overall bill is aimed
at Iran's missile program.
An amendment expands sanctions
on Russia for meddling
in last year's election.
Senate Minority Leader Chuck
Schumer said today it sends a
message to Russian President
Vladimir Putin and
to President Trump.
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY), Minority
Leader: Not only did we pass
a new round of tough sanctions
for Russia's meddling
in our election.
We codified existing
sanctions into law, making
them harder to lift.
Any idea of the president's
that he can lift sanctions on
his own for whatever reason are
dashed by this legislation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Putin fired
back during a national
call-in show in Moscow,
and said the sanctions
say more about the
U.S. than about Russia.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through translator):
Why have they started to talk
about introducing these
sanctions with no grounds?
Of course it is evidence of
continuing internal political
struggle in the United States.
If there weren't other problems,
they would have thought up
something else to hold Russia
back, as it has always been, a
policy of holding Russia back.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will take
a closer look at the Senate's
sanctions bill a little later
in the program.
A leading Republican in the
House of Representatives,
Majority Whip Steve
Scalise, remains in critical
condition tonight after a
gunman shot him during a
congressional baseball practice.
A lobbyist who was wounded is
also in critical condition.
President Trump visited
Scalise in a Washington
hospital last night.
Today, at the White House, he
said Scalise's recovery will
be more difficult than people
thought.
DONALD TRUMP, President
of the United States:
He's in some trouble.
He's a great fighter and
he's going to be OK, we hope.
And Steve in his own way may
have brought some unity to
our long divided country.
And I have a feeling that Steve
has made a great sacrifice,
but there could be some unity
being brought to our country.
Let's hope so.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The gunman, James
Hodgkinson of Illinois, died
after being shot by police.
Meanwhile, the annual
congressional baseball
game is being played
tonight, raising money
for charity.
The American college student
released from North Korea, and
now in a coma, has a massive
loss of brain tissue.
Doctors at the University
of Cincinnati Medical
Center said today that
Otto Warmbier suffered
a severe neurological injury.
They could not say
if he was beaten.
Warmbier's father condemned
the North Koreans, but said
the family wants to move on.
FRED WARMBIER, Father of Otto
Warmbier: What I would say
to the North Korean regime, I
would say I'm so proud of
Otto, my son, who has been in
a pariah regime for the last 18
months, brutalized
and terrorized.
And he's now home
with his family.
And I'm just tremendously
proud of Otto.
His spirit is with us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The State
Department now says that a U.S.
diplomat who went to North Korea
to secure Warmbier's release
also contacted three other
Americans being held.
The department wouldn't
comment on their conditions.
In London, rescue crews have
pulled more bodies from a
burned-out apartment tower.
The death toll in Wednesday's
fire reached at least 17
today, amid rising outrage.
Paul Davies of Independent
Television News has this report.
PAUL DAVIES: A second dawn
brought no end to the agony.
There are no flames now, but
this smoldering shell that was
once home to so many families
still holds an unknown
number of their bodies.
Fire crews believe, in flats
not yet safe to enter, there are
a whole families who couldn't
get out or obeyed the
instruction to stay put.
Many, many remain missing.
And it could take weeks
to confirm their fate.
DANY COTTON, London Fire
Brigade: It's the upper floors
that will be more challenging
and will need some
additional shoring for us
to be able to get in there.
The size of this building,
it could take weeks.
I want to be realistic.
This is a very long process.
PAUL DAVIES: These images
show the destruction on the
ground floor of Grenfell Tower.
This is the area least affected
by that all-consuming fire.
As this photograph shows,
it gets worse as you go up.
Very few escaped
the higher floors.
If the initial response to
this tragedy was horror, as the
hours have passed, there have
been mounting questions
and mounting anger.
WOMAN: There is a
system in place.
That is the product.
That is it.
WOMAN: There's nothing at all.
Yes, but they're lying.
PAUL DAVIES: Labor's
leader visiting the area
heard the concerns of
residents who say fears
they'd expressed about the
tower's safety were ignored.
MAN: Someone has to
be held accountable.
Someone has to be
held responsible.
We don't want it kicked
to the long grass.
We don't want the government to
sort of hide with some hollow
platitude about lessons being
learned.
PAUL DAVIES: The prime minister
paid her own private visit to
Grenfell Tower this morning
and was criticized for meeting
only the emergency teams,
and not the local community.
AFAF BADR, London:
People are very angry.
People are crying.
People are lost, missing.
She's the prime minister.
Where is she?
PAUL DAVIES: London's mayor
visiting the scene said
anger was understandable.
SADIQ KHAN, Mayor of
London: We can see the
anger in the community,
justifiably so, because
many members of the
community have been saying...
WOMAN: Not just the community.
It's everyone outside as well.
MAN: Fed up with
these politicians.
No handshakes.
We want action, not handshakes.
PAUL DAVIES: Sadiq Khan said
the inquiry should be immediate
and that no one should have to
wait two years to find
out why this happened.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Both Britain's
national government and
local police have now
opened investigations
into the fire.
Islamist fighters in Somalia
attacked a popular restaurant
overnight and killed at least 31
people.
It happened in the country's
capital, Mogadishu, and
involved five gunmen.
The Al-Shabaab militants
detonated a car bomb, and then
stormed inside, taking hostages.
Witnesses said they shot
victims at point-blank range.
Somali security forces
finally killed the gunmen
early this morning.
Back in this country, jurors in
the Bill Cosby sexual assault
trial deliberated into the
evening again, after reporting
that they're deadlocked.
The judge in Norristown,
Pennsylvania, told
them to keep at it.
The 79-year-old Cosby is
accused of drugging and
molesting a woman in 2004.
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial average lost
14 points to close below 21360.
The Nasdaq fell 29, and
the S&P 500 slipped five.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the vice chair of the Senate
Intelligence Committee
on revelations that
President Trump is under
scrutiny for potentially
obstructing the Russia
investigation; arrest warrants
issued after a violent clash
outside the Turkish Embassy;
a government visa
program receives renewed
criticism; and much more.
And now for more on the special
counsel's investigation into
the president for possible
obstruction of justice, we
are joined by Carrie Johnson.
She's the justice
correspondent for NPR.
Carrie, welcome
back to the program.
CARRIE JOHNSON, NPR:
Happy to be here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: First of
all, define for us, what
is obstruction of justice?
CARRIE JOHNSON: There's
a bunch of obstruction
of justice statutes on
the books, Judy, but,
in plain language, it
means trying to interfere
with or impede an official
proceeding, something
like a grand jury investigation,
a congressional investigation.
And prosecutors would have
to prove some kind of bad
intent by the person involved.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so tell us
what you have been able to learn
about how the special counsel
is looking into this.
And, by the way, we know it's
been reported that they're also
looking into potential financial
misdeeds.
CARRIE JOHNSON: Yes, the special
counsel investigation appears to
be running on three tracks now,
one probing any Russian
interference in the
election, two, probing
any financial misdealings
in connection with that
interference by associates
of the Trump campaign
and Russians, and, three,
probing obstruction of justice
by the president himself in
the firing of James Comey, the
FBI director he ousted last
month because, he later said,
to take some pressure off the
Russia thing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, this is
clearly, Carrie, an expansion
of what it was originally said
the special counsel's
mission was here.
CARRIE JOHNSON: I think
it's another layer.
We knew at the time
that the deputy attorney
general, Rod Rosenstein,
appointed Bob Mueller
special counsel that his mandate
included crimes that arose or
may have arisen in connection
with the investigation.
Of course, obstruction
of justice may have
arisen in connection
with this investigation
in the president and his
leaning on Comey allegedly to
go light on Michael Flynn, the
national security adviser.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We have also
been hearing in the last few
days, Carrie, about some of the
professionals that the special
counsel, Bob Mueller, has
hired, brought on board for his
team.
Tell us about them.
CARRIE JOHNSON: It's a
breathtaking array of
prosecutorial talent,
Judy, from a man
who had experience prosecuting
the Watergate scandal, a former
FBI agent, Andrew Weissmann,
who led the Justice Department's
fraud and money-laundering
section, Jeannie Rhee, who
had been a top lawyer in
the Obama administration's
DOJ, finally, Michael
Dreeben, the deputy
solicitor general, the man
many lawyers in Justice think
is the most respected guy in
the whole department.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what does
that tell you about what Mr.
Mueller and they will be -- and
his team will be looking for?
CARRIE JOHNSON: Well, it signals
that special counsel Mueller
knows there are a number of
thorny legal issues involved
here, everything from financial
dealings and tracking the money,
to complicated questions of
executive privilege with respect
to the president, his aides,
and conversations he might
have had with people outside
the government as well.
And Michael Dreeben, the
deputy solicitor general, is
well-known for making criminal
convictions stick
in appeals courts.
So they're settling in
for the long haul here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is it
your understanding,
from what you have been
able to learn, that Mr.
Mueller is now finished, that
the team is done, or that
he's continuing to hire, bring
people on?
CARRIE JOHNSON: They have
not given us a formal update.
He's not yet submitted
a formal budget to the
Justice Department.
And I'm hearing from sources
in and outside the government
that more people are clamoring
to join this team.
They view it as a
major public service.
And working with Bob
Mueller, who had been
the FBI director for 12
years, with his reputation
for integrity, is something
that a lot of people inside the
government want to do still.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally,
what are you hearing about
how long this could go on?
How long is it going to take?
CARRIE JOHNSON: There is no
prediction at this point.
Of course, all these
investigators could dig and
dig and dig and find nothing.
At the end of that time, they
may want to do a report that
becomes public, or they may
find something they want to
charge with a grand jury.
And it's unpredictable right
now who they might charge,
if anyone, and whether that
person might want to
fight it out in court for
months or years to come.
Finally, Judy, with respect
to the president himself, no
evidence yet he will face any
charges whatsoever, but there
is a complicated legal question
of whether you can actually
indict a sitting president of
the United States or turn that
evidence over to Congress for
possible impeachment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A
complicated legal question.
And we can assume some
folks are looking into that.
CARRIE JOHNSON: I think a lot
of folks are looking into that.
It arose during Watergate,
of course, and was
never fully answered.
We may yet get an answer in this
investigation before it's over.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Carrie
Johnson of NPR, we thank you.
CARRIE JOHNSON: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Senate
Select Committee on Intelligence
met behind closed doors this
week with three key
figures in their expanding
Russia investigation,
National Security Director
Mike Rogers, the director
of national intelligence,
Dan Coats, and special
counsel Robert Mueller.
And with us now, the committee's
top Democrat, its vice chairman,
Virginia Senator Mark Warner.
Senator, first off, you
-- we have been hearing,
been discussing with
NPR's Carrie Johnson
the fact that the special
counsel has expanded his
investigation to include
potential obstruction
of justice.
Is that something your
committee is doing as well?
®MD-BSEN.
MARK WARNER (D), Virginia:
Well, Judy, I'm not
going to comment on
the expanse of special
counselor Mueller's
investigation.
I do think it's an indication
of how serious it is that he
is obviously recruiting some
of the top talent from
around the country to
assist him in this effort.
It shows how seriously
he's taking this effort,
and, frankly, how
seriously the vast majority
of elected officials, Democrats
and Republicans, who realize
that the Russian intervention
was massive in our elections.
We have got to get
to the bottom of it.
We have got to make sure
it doesn't happen again.
It really appears that
the only elected official
maybe in Washington
that doesn't accept the
potential dangerousness of
the Russian intervention
is actually the president
of the United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, that's
what I wanted to ask you about.
The president has been
actively tweeting today.
Among other things, he said
they went after a -- he said
they made up a phony collusion
with the Russians story,
they found zero proof,
and now, he said, they're
going after obstruction
of justice because
they found nothing.
SEN.
MARK WARNER: That's, you know,
just factually not appropriate.
You know, we are still early on
into particularly some of the
individuals that were affiliated
with the Trump campaign and
their potential contacts or
communications with Russians.
We thought we would be further
along, but for the fact that the
president, in an unprecedented
way, fired the FBI
director, Jim Comey.
We have had obviously a pattern
here where there are at least
reports of other individuals
that were at least
contacted by the president.
I'm not going to comment
on the specifics of
the individuals we saw.
And that's -- we need
to keep confidential.
But we do have the
former National Security
Adviser General Flynn
who was fired because
he didn't come forward with
his contacts with the Russians.
We have had the attorney general
recuse himself because he didn't
fully disclose his contacts
with the Russians.
If the president's rendition
is true, you know, that there's
no there there, why wouldn't
he collaborate with
the investigation to
get this cleared up, as
opposed to his constant
tweetage saying that this is
a witch-hunt and fake news?
I don't think there's any member
of the Senate that believes this
is fake news that the Russians
interfered, just as they
interfered in France,
just as they will
probably interfere in the
German elections coming
up later this year.
And it's a national
security threat.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, while we're
talking about the question of
whether there is obstruction
or not, I know your committee
met this week, as we have
just reported, with Dan Coats,
the director of national
intelligence, and
also with the National
Security Agency director,
Mike Rogers, in both cases,
presumably asking questions
that they wouldn't -- they were
not willing the answer
in open session.
Were they able to shed any
more light on this question of
whether they -- go ahead, yes.
(CROSSTALK)
SEN.
MARK WARNER: I'm not going
to get into the content
of their testimony.
I will say that it's very
important that sources
and methods in terms
of how we discovered
Russian intervention, that that
is maintained and preserved,
and there's an appropriate
classified portion.
I do think there are questions
that still need to be
explored about, if a president
was calling on these subjects,
how much of that is classified.
I'm not going to comment again
on any specifics, but these are
all -- and what I worry about
is, is there a pattern emerging?
And that's something, again,
that time will tell and,
obviously, the special counsel,
Mueller, will
continue to look into.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You met
with the special counsel,
as we said, yesterday,
you and Chairman Richard
Burr.
Can you explain for us
the difference between
the mission of what you're
doing, your committee,
and the House Intelligence
Committee, vs. what
Mr. Mueller is doing?
SEN.
MARK WARNER: Sure.
Well, special counsel Mueller
has got a criminal standard.
In many cases, that criminal
standard is quite high.
He will have to -- if he
chooses to bring charges against
anyone, they will have to
meet those legal standards.
We're leading a
counterintelligence
investigation that
started with looking
at Russian interference
in our election, was broadened
to include any potential
communication or collaboration
between officials in part of
either campaign, and the focus
is generally on folks affiliated
with the Trump campaign,
and the Russians.
We have actually not
had a chance to get to
many of the witnesses
that have been at least
bandied about because, again,
this -- we have been superseded
in a way by the firing of
Director Comey, then President
Trump disparages Director Comey
in front of the Russians, saying
on national television that he
fired him because of the Russia
investigation, all things that,
at least for this senator, raise
a lot of questions that I'm
still trying to sort through.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, no concern
you're going to get in each
other's way, that what your
committee...
(CROSSTALK)
SEN.
MARK WARNER: I think
that's something that we
have to make sure there's
appropriate deconfliction.
At the end of the day, you know,
the criminal investigation, we
can't do anything that would
interfere with that
criminal investigation.
And, you know, I'm not
going to, again, comment
about our conversations
with special counsel
Mueller, but I think it was
a good first step, and I
think we will have to have
ongoing communications.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just one
final quick question.
Vice President Mike Pence, it
was announced today, has hired
his own private counsel to
address any issues arising out
of the Russia investigation.
Do you have a comment on that?
SEN.
MARK WARNER: No, I don't have
a comment, but I just -- other
than the fact that it would
be helpful if the administration
actually collaborated and
cooperated with all of us.
What the Russians did in 2016
in the United States, the
Russians have also done in the
French elections, they will
do in the German elections.
And, as a state that
has statewide elections
this year, I'm concerned
about their ongoing
efforts to try to, frankly, sow
chaos in our democratic process.
And let me be clear.
This is not about
relitigating 2016.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
SEN.
MARK WARNER: It's not about
the Russians being for
Republicans or Democrats.
The Russians are for
their own interests.
And we have to be careful about
this new form of conflict.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But just
very quickly, Senator,
so I understand, you're
saying the administration
is not collaborating
right now with you?
SEN.
MARK WARNER: I wish there
was closer cooperation.
There are a number of members
of the administration who
volunteered to come forward.
There are a number of
individuals that work
on the Trump campaign.
But I don't see what
value is added by the
president's constant
dismissal of the seriousness
of this threat.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Mark
Warner, the vice chairman of
the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence, we thank you.
SEN.
MARK WARNER: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As we
reported earlier in the
program, the Senate today
overwhelmingly passed
new sanctions against Iran.
But a key amendment makes
that bill even broader.
It now includes sanctions
aimed at Russia.
This is five months after U.S.
intelligence agencies made
public that Russian President
Vladimir Putin ordered
cyber-interference
in the 2016 election.
Lisa Desjardins has
been following the vote,
and she joins me now.
So, Lisa, tell us what
these Russia sanctions are.
LISA DESJARDINS: These are
not just symbolic, Judy.
These are significant sanctions.
Let's take a quick look.
First of all, they target
Russian industries,
especially the energy sector.
Those sanctions would include
things limiting U.S. companies,
prohibiting them from working
with Russian firms, say,
exploring the Arctic.
That's a big deal.
Also, this would target
individuals working in
defense or intelligence,
individual Russians.
There are some new
powers in here.
The Treasury would get
access to U.S. bank records
of Russian oligarchs.
Also, $250 million for
a countering Russia
influence fund that would
focus on cyber-security,
but also could be
some U.S. propaganda.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, separately,
the Senate passed an amendment
to this that affects the
president.
Tell us about that.
LISA DESJARDINS: This
is remarkable, Judy.
This is a Republican Congress
asserting power with a
Republican president in office.
Let's look at exactly
how that would work.
If this president wanted
to roll back any of these
sanctions, he would have to give
Congress 30-day notice
under this amendment.
Congress could then
disapprove and ultimately
block the president from
rolling back sanctions
with a two-thirds vote.
Essentially, Judy, what the
Senate is saying here is, we
think Congress should set Russia
policy now, not the president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
what is the White House
saying about all this?
LISA DESJARDINS: The White
House today said it's
reviewing these sanctions.
No secret the president is in
a very tricky position here,
not just because of this Russia
investigation, but because he
and his secretary of state have
said they don't think this is
a good time to increase
sanctions on Russia.
They think it could backfire.
But it's interesting, Judy, the
Senate attached these Russia
sanctions to an Iran sanctions
bill that the president
wants to sign.
Meanwhile, Democrats are worried
about the Iran sanctions,
worried that that could cause
problems with the Iran deal,
which leaves the president
deciding, does he swallow these
Russia sanctions that go with
an Iran deal he likes at a time
of the Russia investigation?
We have to wait and see.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in two
seconds, if the president were
to veto this, the assumption
is, it would be overridden?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's correct.
It passed with 98
votes in the Senate.
Absolutely, they would
override that veto.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa
Desjardins, thank you.
LISA DESJARDINS: My pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A new
flash point in the tense
and fraying alliance
between the United States
and Turkey, after Turkish
security forces attacked
protesters during
President Erdogan's
recent visit to Washington, D.C.
Hari Sreenivasan has our report.
And a warning: Images in this
report may disturb some viewers.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It's been
one month since attackers
launched into protesters outside
the Turkish ambassador's
residence in Washington.
Now D.C. officials have issued
warrants on assault charges.
Police Chief Peter Newsham:
PETER NEWSHAM, Acting
Washington, D.C., Police
Chief: We all saw the
violence that was perpetrated
against peaceful demonstrators
here in Washington,
D.C., and it's just
something we're not going
to tolerate.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
demonstrators had gathered
at a park shortly after
Turkey's president,
Recep Tayyip Erdogan,
met with President Trump
at the White House.
Then, as Erdogan arrived
at the ambassador's
residence, trouble started.
Video showed security
guards and supporters teeing
off on the protesters.
D.C. police officers tried to
separate and calm the crowd,
but nine people were hurt.
Two people were arrested
that day, and two more
were apprehended by
U.S. Marshals yesterday.
Now there are 12 new warrants
for Turkish security officers.
Most, if not all, returned
home after the attack.
Two Canadians are
also being sought.
It's unclear why they
allegedly joined the melee.
Chief Newsham is calling for
the suspects to surrender
and not fight extradition.
PETER NEWSHAM: If you
are a law-abiding person,
and you feel like you
didn't do anything wrong,
then please present yourself
here to answer to these charges.
HARI SREENIVASAN:
Erdogan responded to the
charges, and said the
demonstrators were associated
with Kurdish militants
who've been engaged in a
long insurgency against
the Turkish government.
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN, Turkish
President (through translator):
Of course we're going the fight
this on legal and
political grounds.
What kind of law is this?
If my security guards are not
going to protect me, why would
I bring them with me to America?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Meanwhile,
Erdogan's role in all of
this remains a question.
After the incident, The
New York Times examined
the video and spotted
Erdogan's head of security
leaning into the president's
car, and then speaking into
his earpiece, just before three
guards ran toward
the protesters.
At the time, the State
Department said it
communicated -- quote
-- "concerns" to Turkey
over the confrontation, and
today said -- quote - - "We
will weigh additional actions."
STEVEN COOK, Council on Foreign
Relations: President Erdogan's
security team irresponsible,
unprofessional and violent.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Steven Cook
is a senior fellow with the
Council on Foreign Relations
in Washington.
He says relations between
Washington and Ankara are as
bad as they have ever been.
STEVEN COOK: Charging President
Erdogan's security team
with crimes is going to add
another element of tension
between the two countries.
This tension will no doubt be
used by the Turkish leadership
to advance their own political
agenda, which is only
going to cause raw feelings
here in Washington.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The U.S.
and Turkey are already at odds
over Kurdish forces fighting
in Syria.
And the Turks have demanded the
U.S. extradite exiled cleric
Fethullah Gulen for allegedly
organizing last
summer's failed coup.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Race Matters - - how a couple's
love 50 years ago changed
marriage in the U.S.; lost
music from the Holocaust
rediscovered; and TV great Dick
Cavett gives a Brief But
Spectacular take on his life.
But first: how a
little-known program
designed to attract foreign
investment is increasingly
under the microscope,
for economic reasons
and political ones.
Thousands of investors apply
and participate annually, and
one real estate business in
particular has put it back in
the spotlight in recent months:
the family of Jared Kushner,
the president's son-in-law.
Our economics reporter,
Paul Solman, has covered
the controversies around
the program before.
Here's his latest update.
It's part of our weekly
series Making Sense.
PAUL SOLMAN: The soaring real
estate market in Jersey City,
New Jersey, due south of Wall
Street, a city becoming famous
for its many murals and its
wave of emigres from Manhattan
and Brooklyn fleeing
sky-high rents.
One neighborhood that's on the
rise, Journal Square, named
after the 150-year Journal News.
One of its latter-day
reporters, Terrence McDonald.
TERRENCE MCDONALD, The
Jersey Journal: This was
our old headquarters.
And Jared Kushner's
company bought that and
bought the office building
next door and bought
this whole vacant
lot right here.
PAUL SOLMAN: Jared Kushner
is, of course, President
Trump's son-in-law.
And what are they
going to build?
TERRENCE MCDONALD: The plan
is to build two towers on this
vacant lot and one tower across
the street, 72 stories,
mostly residential and also
commercial retail on the bottom.
PAUL SOLMAN: Now, you may have
heard about this development
last month, when Jared Kushner's
sister pitched it to
investors in China.
MAN: CNN found out about this
event because of this ad.
It was actually posted
in the elevator of our
building here in Beijing.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, reporters
went, including CNN's Matt
Rivers, and most were promptly
shown the door, which only
provoked more coverage.
Why the selective secrecy?
For one thing, Nicole Kushner
Meyer may have thought twice
about the optics or my-optics
of trading on her family
connection to the president,
though Kushner companies later
said Meyer -- quote
-- "apologizes if that
mention of her brother
was in any way interpreted
as an attempt to lure
investors" -- unquote.
But also iffy, the investment
itself, criticized for selling
U.S. citizenship for cash, the
embattled EB-5 visa program, in
which foreigners who ante up a
million dollars to create 10
U.S. jobs are granted permanent
residency, and eventual U.S.
citizenship, for themselves
and for all immediate
family members under age 21.
Now, the Kushners, who declined
to comment for this story,
have used EB-5 investments
before, also here
in Jersey City.
JARED KUSHNER, Senior
Presidential Adviser:
As a company, we have
done a lot of projects,
but I have actually never
done a groundbreaking before.
PAUL SOLMAN: Fifty
million dollars of Chinese
cash for visas helped
build Trump Bay Street,
the president licensing his name
to his son-in-law's company, the
financing at below-market rates.
TERRENCE MCDONALD: This
is one of the newer luxury
high-rises here in Jersey City.
The highest price I saw
was on the 48th floor.
It's a 50-story building.
It was about $5,000 a month
for a two-bedroom/two-bathroom
apartment.
PAUL SOLMAN: Luxury apartments,
just a few minutes by
subway from Manhattan.
But, hey, Congress decided,
during a recession in 1990,
that a million dollars to create
10 jobs is a good deal
for the U.S. economy, no
matter what the project.
It turns out, however, that the
investors in Kushner's project
only had to put up $500,000,
half-price tickets to
citizenship for themselves
and their entire families,
thanks to a clause
that takes 50 percent off if you
create the jobs in a -- quote
-- "high-unemployment area"
- - unquote.
But wait a minute.
The unemployment rate around
Trump Bay Street was very low.
NORMAN ODER, Journalist:
There is an essential
dodge here going on.
There's something
really fake going on.
PAUL SOLMAN: Journalist Norman
Oder was the first to report on
the loophole that the Kushners,
and pretty much all urban
developers who use the
EB-5 program, exploit.
NORMAN ODER: EB-5 investments
are supposed to be a million
dollars unless it's in a rural
area or an area of
high unemployment.
That's called a targeted
employment area.
Then it's $500,000.
Guess what?
Every project is finagled
into a high-unemployment area.
PAUL SOLMAN: So
how do you do that?
NORMAN ODER: You have to
connect census tracts.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, let's walk
you through the process that
played out here in Jersey City.
TERRENCE MCDONALD: We're
about one mile away
from Trump Bay Street.
PAUL SOLMAN: But we're
still in the EB-5 district.
TERRENCE MCDONALD: Yes, we are.
PAUL SOLMAN: EB-5 visa
investors can pay half-price
if they're investing in
an area with a jobless
rate one-and-a-half times
the national average.
I can see that we're
gradually getting into
dicier territory here.
TERRENCE MCDONALD: We're about
two miles away from Trump Bay
Street now in an area of the
city that has struggled
with violence and with
crime and with poverty.
PAUL SOLMAN: In 2014, when the
Kushners and their partners
were pitching Chinese visa
seekers, the national
unemployment rate was
just over 6 percent.
So now we're how far
away from downtown?
TERRENCE MCDONALD: We're about
three, a little more than
three miles away from Trump Bay
Street now, on Ocean Avenue.
PAUL SOLMAN: And we're
in a substantially
worse neighborhood now.
TERRENCE MCDONALD: Yes, yes,
businesses that are closed.
And this area does struggle
with violence even more than
the neighborhood we were just
in.
PAUL SOLMAN: We're walking
the so-called targeted
employment area the
developers created, with
an average jobless rate
of more than 9 percent.
TERRENCE MCDONALD: The
unemployment rate where
Trump Bay Street is,
about four miles away,
is so low that they have to
include a huge swathe of the
inner city and lower half of
the city to make the rate work.
PAUL SOLMAN: The only
requirement, the employment
area has to be made up
of neighborhoods that
border each other.
TERRENCE MCDONALD:
So, we're about at the
end of the line here.
That's Bayonne on the other
side of the train tracks.
PAUL SOLMAN: About five miles
and a whole lot of shoe leather
south of Trump Bay Street,
a gerrymandered, but legal
district made up of 16 different
census tracts, with an overall
unemployment rate of
9.8 percent, when the
national average was 6.
The claim is that Trump
Bay Street created
more than 1,280 jobs.
But did it actually help the
poor parts of town that made
its financing attractive?
So, you work in construction.
MAN: Absolutely.
PAUL SOLMAN: Did you try
to get a job downtown?
MAN: Several of us tried
to get a job downtown.
But they're not hiring us.
I don't know no one at all
who has no type of job from
downtown at Trump Towers or who
informed anyone
else about the jobs.
TERRENCE MCDONALD: Do you
think that the construction
of these luxury high-rises
downtown has benefited
this area of the city at all?
MAN: No.
Look around.
People -- a lot of people
need help around here.
PAUL SOLMAN: Any of
the contractors you
know work downtown?
WOMAN: No.
No.
PAUL SOLMAN: You either?
WOMAN: No.
PAUL SOLMAN: What do you think
of the idea, though, of you
being included in this area
that then allows them
to get the foreign money
to build the towers?
WOMAN: I don't
think that's fair.
STEVEN FULOP, Mayor of
Jersey City, New Jersey:
The intention of the EB-5
program are to subsidize
areas in a city or community
that are lower-income,
in needs of jobs, and
don't have development.
PAUL SOLMAN: Not to subsidize
areas that don't need it, says
Jersey City Mayor Steven Fulop.
STEVEN FULOP: The media scrutiny
on this stuff has brought a
lot of that to light, and there
will probably be policy changes
in Washington as a result of it.
PAUL SOLMAN: Well, there's
been legislation to try
to reform EB-5 for years.
STEVEN FULOP: I think now you're
in a unique moment in time
where there's more scrutiny
and more awareness around it.
PAUL SOLMAN: Mayor Fulop, a
Democrat up for reelection
this fall, is also more aware.
The day after the story broke
about Nicole Kushner Meyer's
efforts in China, he withdrew
his support for a usually
standard 30-year tax abatement
and $30 million municipal bond
that the Kushners and their
partners had applied for to
build one Journal Square.
So, where's the mayor right now?
STEVEN FULOP: We're
not giving the subsidy.
We have clearly said that,
and they say they can't
move forward without it.
So we will see where
it goes from here.
PAUL SOLMAN: Where it's gone
is that, just yesterday, the
Kushner consortium withdrew
its tax break request.
According to the private company
helping raise $150 million
in EB-5 money, 6,600 new jobs
are now on hold.
But they would be in a
prospering part of town with
just a 4 percent jobless rate.
The poorer neighborhoods
to the south?
Their job was to boost the
average unemployment rate high
enough to qualify investors for
the half-price visas.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this
is economics correspondent Paul
Solman reporting from Jersey
City.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This week
marks the 50th anniversary
of the landmark Supreme
Court decision Loving
vs. Virginia.
In 1967, the justices struck
down Virginia's laws prohibiting
interracial marriage.
In her latest book, "Loving:
Interracial Intimacy in
America and the Threat
to White Supremacy,"
Georgetown University
law Professor Sheryll
Cashin explores the
history of white supremacy
in this country and how
relationships between different
races challenge that ideology.
As part of our Race
Matters series, I sat down
with Cashin yesterday.
Sheryll Cashin, thank you
very much for joining us.
So, the title of the book refers
to the Virginia couple, Richard
Loving, his wife, Mildred,
who were arrested, thrown in
jail for the crime of marrying
each other in the state
of Virginia in the 1950s,
and then, in 1967, the
Supreme Court decision.
But your story, your telling
of this story, the book, goes
much earlier than that, to
the -- before the
beginning of this country.
®MDNMHERYLL CASHIN, Author,
"Loving: Interracial Intimacy in
America and the Threat to White
Supremacy": The
anti-miscegenation law
was created as part
of the law of slavery.
In the 1600s, you had
white indentured servants
and black indentured
servants and slaves working
together, fraternizing together.
And when slave owners wanted
to transition to black chattel
slavery, they had this problem.
And so they put in slave
codes laws that penalized
interracial sex and marriage.
And that was --
began in the 1660s.
And so, for the next 300
years, you had the state of
Virginia and other states trying
to separate people like
Mildred and Richard Loving.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Going back to the
beginning, was this something
that was just bred in the
psyche of the people who
lived in this country?
Where did it come from?
SHERYLL CASHIN: Well, in the
elite capitalist class, the
landed gentry that could afford
to buy big estates and
own people, this idea
of the supremacy of the
white Christian goes
back to the Crusades.
But there is much evidence that,
in colonial Virginia, in the
colonies, the working bonded
people didn't have a
concept of whiteness or
supremacy or race at all.
They related to each other
as struggling people.
It's only when the slave owning
class needs to teach people to
treat each other differently
based on race for utilitarian
reasons that that begins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What were the
forces along the way in the
history of this country that
were pushing against
people coming together,
that were working against,
not just intermarriage,
but friendships, any kind of
connections between the races?
SHERYLL CASHIN: Right.
Wherever you have a regime
of the color line, whether
it's slavery or Jim Crow
or a divide-and-conquer
kind of politics, there's
an economic story there.
What the elites most
feared was that struggling
whites and people of
color would come together
in politics to demand
more of economic elites.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, along
the way, as you point out
throughout the book, there were
also forces at work to bring
the two -- not just the two,
but to bring all races together.
SHERYLL CASHIN: America
has been in this dance
from the beginning.
There have been two ideas,
the beautiful, egalitarian,
fundamental idea of universal
human dignity in Thomas
Jefferson's words in
the Declaration of
Independence, but also
this regime of white supremacy
that is really designed
to help with capitalism.
And throughout this period,
there have always been a small
cadre of people that crossed
lines for alliance or for love.
And I feature some
of those people.
Some of my favorites are
Frederick Douglass and
Thaddeus Stevens, who
not only were radical
in their politics, but were
radical enough to have women
of a different race as their
lovers or common law
wives or -- or wives.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why were
they able to prevail
in some instances?
SHERYLL CASHIN: The
radical Republicans behind
Reconstruction prevailed
with the idea that
people of color and progressive
open-minded whites would
come together in politics for
the common good and create
things like public education.
My bottom line point is that the
class of what I call culturally
dexterous person that's
open to difference in
this country and wants to
make it work is growing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's what
I wanted to ask you, because
you do use the term cultural
dexterity throughout.
SHERYLL CASHIN: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What
do you mean by that?
SHERYLL CASHIN: So, cultural
dexterity is the ability to
enter a situation where you
are outnumbered by a
different group and
experience that with comfort,
even wonder, an enhanced
capacity for dealing with
people of a different group.
It's the opposite
of colorblindness.
It's the ability to see
and understand difference
and accept it, rather
than sort of demanding
that someone else assimilate
to your cultural norms.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why do
you think it's spreading?
I know there are people who
look at the racial divide in
this country today and say, yes,
we have made progress, but we
have such a long way to go.
SHERYLL CASHIN:
Yes, I will agree.
I acknowledge that we're in
a state of toxic polarity.
But all I'm saying is that I
believe we're going to get to
a point where a critical mass
of folks, particularly white
people in this country, have
accepted the loss of centrality
of whiteness.
And when you combine those folks
with growing populations of
people of color, you're going
to get a majority coalition
that will fight together
for the common good.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Even if, along
the way, you may always have
a group of people who fiercely
believe something different.
SHERYLL CASHIN: Yes.
I'm not saying that interracial
relationships are going to make
racism go away, or -- nothing
like that.
There will always
probably be some people,
unfortunately, that are racist.
But I think they're
a minority now.
And I think they
will continue to be a
minority in this country.
And what gives me hope is that
there is a growing population
of folks who like diversity
and want to make it work and
want to be part of the coalition
for bringing everybody along.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sheryll Cashin,
the book is "Loving: Interracial
Intimacy in America and
the Threat to White Supremacy,"
Thank you very much.
SHERYLL CASHIN:
Thank you so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: When the death
camps and ghettos of Europe were
liberated at the end of World
War II, a psychologist
from Chicago visited former
prisoners and recorded
dozens of interviews.
David Boder's recordings are
among the earliest testimonies
from Holocaust survivors.
And long-missing reels of
songs from this collection
were recently discovered at the
University of Akron, Ohio.
From PBS station WVIZ
ideastream in Cleveland,
David C. Barnett reports.
DAVID C. BARNETT: Jon Endres
gingerly threads a thin silver
strand of wire through a machine
that will reproduce some
sounds unheard for decades.
JON ENDRES, University of Akron:
It runs much like a reel-to-reel
tape player, if you remember
those.
DAVID C. BARNETT: Endres
is a media specialist at
the University of Akron.
His colleague James Newhall
spent three years building this
playback machine from spare
parts scrounged from
electronic stores and eBay.
The goal was to play some
mysterious recordings
made by psychologist
David Boder over 70 years
ago on a wire recorder.
DAVID BAKER, Cummings Center
for the History of Psychology:
One of Boder's areas of interest
and an important area of
his work was his work on
the measurement of trauma.
That was the basis of his grant
in 1946 to travel to Europe to
interview a group of traumatized
people.
And this included many
survivors of the Holocaust.
A collection of Boder material
was deposited here in 1967.
So, it included some
instruments and apparatus,
documents, and it included
a box of wire recordings.
MAN: One, two, three,
one two, three.
DAVID BAKER: Scholars
were telling us that
there was a missing reel.
There was a reel of songs
that were sung to Boder by
Holocaust survivors in a camp in
France after the war.
We had a box of reels, and
scholars would ask from time
to time, do you know what's
on those?
And we had to say, no, we don't.
DAVID C. BARNETT:
But now they do.
MAN: We are reproducing on this
spool a set of songs that have
been recorded 50 kilometers
of Paris at a colony
of displaced persons.
DAVID C. BARNETT: Baker
says the recent discovery
of this long-missing
reel of songs in the
Cummings Center archives has
sparked worldwide interest.
DAVID BAKER: Two of the
songs were sung by a
woman named Guta Frank.
Guta Frank had survived
a number of the ghettos
in Poland, eventually
ending up in a -- doing
forced labor at a
munitions factory.
One song they translated for
us: "Our village is burning."
In singing the song, she changed
the lyric from, "Our village
is burning" to "The Jewish
people are burning."
In introducing the song, Guta
Frank discussed the fact that
the composer's daughter would
sing this song in basements in
the Krakow ghetto, inspiring
people to rebel against
the Nazis.
DAVID C. BARNETT: For
concentration camp prisoners
who had no means of
writing down and preserving
what was happening to them,
they could sing songs about
it to each other and pass the
stories down in
an oral tradition.
Australian researcher
Joseph Toltz focuses the
music of the Holocaust.
And, in this specialized
field, he's heard it all.
JOSEPH TOLTZ, Researcher:
This was a beloved song
that traveled around the
entire Yiddish-speaking
world, even to America
and other places.
DAVID C. BARNETT: Toltz is
particularly impressed with the
clarity of the Akron recordings.
JOSEPH TOLTZ: This is a
technology that is 60, 70 years
old and completely outdated.
And they have done it
in such a way that has
brought a completely
new quality to the sound
that is sort of trapped
in these wire recordings.
DAVID C. BARNETT: Jon
Endres was the one who
made the digital transfer.
JON ENDRES: I remember
hearing Krakow.
And I remember recognizing
some of the more German words
in Yiddish, and knowing full
well they were saying things
along the lines of burning and
dying, and it was extremely
intense.
DAVID BAKER: It's a bit like
hearing the voice of a ghost.
Here are voices that have
been silent for 70 years.
And, all of a sudden,
they're singing.
And they're singing to us.
DAVID C. BARNETT: For the
"PBS NewsHour," I'm David
C. Barnett in Akron, Ohio.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to another
in our Brief But Spectacular
series, where we ask people
to describe their passions.
Tonight, we hear from legendary
talk show host Dick Cavett,
whose in-depth discussions
kept American television
audiences entertained and
intellectually engaged
for more than five
decades.
His latest book is "Brief
Encounters: Conversations, Magic
Moments, and Assorted Hijinks."
DICK CAVETT, Author, "Brief
Encounters: Conversations,
Magic Moments, and
Assorted Hijinks": Somebody
said once, what's the secret
of doing a successful, what's
the Brits call a chat show?
If there is a secret,
it was enunciated by
the great Jack Paar.
He said, "Kid, don't
do interviews."
And I said, "Well, what do
I do Jack, read to them?"
He said, "Make it
a conversation."
People ask me, what kind of
show did you decide to do or how
would you describe your show?
And I have never been able
to come up with an answer for
that, because of the fact that
I never had any plan.
All I knew was I was being
thrown into and responsible for
90 minutes of live television.
But I had the advantage of
having seen great examples of
what I would be doing by Jack
Paar, Merv Griffin, Johnny
Carson, all of whom I wrote for.
JOHNNY CARSON, "The Tonight
Show": Would you welcome,
please, Mr. Dick Cavett?
(APPLAUSE)
DICK CAVETT: With Johnny, of
course, you could turn him on
in your head, how he will word
it, how many
syllables he will use.
All of that comes together to
make you able to write a line
that they can come out and
say and sound like themselves.
Will you welcome, please,
Mr. Marlon Brando?
(APPLAUSE)
DICK CAVETT: I was just
slap-happy delirious to
have Marlon Brando on
And my director admitted later
that he said, when Brando
threw that million-dollar grin
in a close-up shot,
I couldn't cut away.
My wife's favorite line from
that show is when I said:
Were you happy with the way
"The Godfather" came out?
MARLON BRANDO, Actor: I would
rather not talk about movies.
I don't think they're...
(LAUGHTER)
DICK CAVETT: I had the luck
of meeting and sitting with
Katharine Hepburn, Bette Davis,
Orson Welles, Fred Astaire,
Groucho Marx, Alfred Hitchcock,
Robert Mitchum, oh, and
the great John Huston.
Somebody semi-humorously warned
me, "You're becoming the poster
boy for depression," because
I would -- chose to talk about
it, because I found that,
when I did, it helped people.
I did shows with it, a thing
that is an ungodly task, as you
stand there sing merrily with
Ethel Merman, and you
feel like roadkill.
And people will say to Robin
Williams, you have the thrill
of going out on stage and
getting an audience screaming
with happiness in their life.
And, incidentally, I saw Robin
come off one night after doing
that and saying: "I could
make those people happy.
Why can't I make
myself that happy?"
That's central to the problem.
When people ask me, who's doing
what you did, or is there a
show that is similar to what
you were doing, I don't think
there's anything exactly like
it, partly because it's just
- - the medium
has changed a lot.
I might be more like parts
of Jon Stewart and certainly
parts of Stephen Colbert.
But people tell me
nothing is quite like it.
And I wish somebody would tell
me exactly what they mean.
My name is Dick Cavett, and
this is my, how shall I say,
Brief But Spectacular take on
my life and
conversation, I guess.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What a life
and a walk down memory lane.
And now again to our
honor roll of American
service personnel killed
in Iraq and the Afghanistan
conflict.
We add them as their deaths
are made official and
photographs become available.
Here, in silence,
are three more.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Friday, I sit down
with retired Army
General David Petraeus to
discuss the fight against
ISIS and the ongoing
war in Afghanistan.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow evening with
Mark Shields and David Brooks.
Tonight, we leave you with
a view of the bipartisan
congressional baseball
game, which gets under
way tonight, one day
after the shooting at a
baseball practice field.
We're all hoping for a
peaceful evening of baseball.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.